p8105\_hw2\_Ec3342
================
Ekta Chaudhary
30/09/2019

# Question 1

## Reading and cleaning the Mr. Trash Wheel sheet.

\#Mentioned the path to the xlsx file using path =
“./data/Trash\_wheet\_data.xlsx”, specified the sheet to read by
providing the name of the sheet which is Mr. Trash Wheel here. Cleaned
the variable names so that they are reasonable, omitted the rows that do
not include dumpster-specific data, rounded the number of sports balls
to the nearest integer.

``` r
trashwheel_data = 
  read_excel(
    path = "./data/Trash_wheet_data.xlsx", 
    sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel"
  ) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  drop_na(., dumpster) %>%
  mutate(
    sports_balls = as.integer(sports_balls)
    )
```

    ## New names:
    ## * `` -> ...15
    ## * `` -> ...16
    ## * `` -> ...17

## Reading and cleaning the precipitation data for 2017 and 2018.

\#Omitted the rows without precipitation data and added a variable year
which is = 2017 for precipitaion\_data\_2017 and 2018 for
precipitation\_data\_2018.Combined both the precipitation data
(precipitation\_data\_2017 and precipitation\_data\_2018) to form
combined\_data. In the combined\_data used month.name to convert the
month from numeric to character variable.

``` r
precipitation_data_2017 =
  read_excel(
    path = "./data/Trash_wheet_data.xlsx",
    sheet = "2017 Precipitation", 
    skip = 1
    ) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  drop_na() %>%
  mutate(
    year = 2017
    )

precipitation_data_2018 =
  read_excel(
    path = "./data/Trash_wheet_data.xlsx",
    sheet = "2018 Precipitation",
    skip = 1
    ) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  drop_na() %>%
  mutate(
    year = 2018
    )

combined_data = union_all(
  precipitation_data_2017, precipitation_data_2018
  ) %>%
  mutate(
    month = month.name[month] 
    )
```

## Describing both the datasets\!

*The number of observations in trashwheel\_data is 344 *The number of
observations in combined\_data is 24 (The number of observations in
precipitation\_data\_2017 is 12, The number of observations in
precipitation\_data\_2018 is 12) *The key variables would be month,
year, total. *The total precipitation in 2018 was 70.33 \*The median
number of sports ball in a dumpster in 2017 was 8

# Question 2

\#\#First reading the datasets pols-month.csv and cleaning the data in
pols-month.csv. Used separate() to break up the variable mon into
integer variables year, month, and day; replaced month number with month
name; created a president variable taking values gop and dem, and
removed prez\_dem and prez\_gop; and removed the day variable.

``` r
pols_data = 
  read_csv(file = "./data/pols-month.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  separate(
    col = mon, into = c("year", "month", "day")) %>% 
  select(
    prez_gop, prez_dem, everything()
  ) %>%
  pivot_longer(
    prez_gop:prez_dem, names_to = "president", names_prefix = "prez_") %>%
  mutate(
   month = as.numeric(month),
   month = month.abb[month]
  ) %>%
  select(
    -day
  )
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   mon = col_date(format = ""),
    ##   prez_gop = col_double(),
    ##   gov_gop = col_double(),
    ##   sen_gop = col_double(),
    ##   rep_gop = col_double(),
    ##   prez_dem = col_double(),
    ##   gov_dem = col_double(),
    ##   sen_dem = col_double(),
    ##   rep_dem = col_double()
    ## )

\#\#Cleaning the data in snp.csv using a similar process to the above.
For consistency across datasets, arranging according to year and month,
and organizing so that year and month are the leading columns.

``` r
snp_data =
  read_csv(file = "./data/snp.csv") %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  separate(
  col = date, into = c("month", "day", "year")) %>% 
  arrange(
  as.integer(year), as.integer(month)) %>%
  select(
     year, month, close) %>%
  mutate(
    month = as.numeric(month),
    month = month.abb[month]
    ) 
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   date = col_character(),
    ##   close = col_double()
    ## )

\#\#Tidying the unemployment data so that it can be merged with the
previous datasets

``` r
unemployment_data =
  read_csv(file = "./data/unemployment.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  pivot_longer(
    jan:dec, names_to = "month", values_to = "rate") %>%
  mutate(
    year = as.character(year)) %>%
  select(
    year, month, everything()
  )
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   Year = col_double(),
    ##   Jan = col_double(),
    ##   Feb = col_double(),
    ##   Mar = col_double(),
    ##   Apr = col_double(),
    ##   May = col_double(),
    ##   Jun = col_double(),
    ##   Jul = col_double(),
    ##   Aug = col_double(),
    ##   Sep = col_double(),
    ##   Oct = col_double(),
    ##   Nov = col_double(),
    ##   Dec = col_double()
    ## )

\#\#merged\_data is formed by joining snp into pols using year and month
as keys. final\_merged\_data is formed by joining the merged\_data with
unemployment\_data using year and month as keys.

``` r
merged_data =
  left_join(
    snp_data, pols_data, by = c("year","month"))

final_merged_data =
  left_join(
    merged_data, unemployment_data, by = c("year","month"))
```

# Question 3
